At the time, you see, I left right at the tactile end
of all of that, but as I recall, I had simply made the
assumption that when that was all over, the Board
of Regents and the Board of Directors at the time
were very supportive of it. I know that Pete
Peterson had been active in the association, and
he later was the name to the Board of Regents. and
there was a kind of a carryover of leadership on the
board that had been involved either through the
association's work or some way where it did with
the university. Sterling Evans by then is on the
board. Do you remember any role that he played? I
don't remember any role that Sterling played
during the century study, I assume he was a member
of the... I think he was. I'm sure he was one of them.
But my memory of Sterling Evans was the fact that he
was a student loan fund trustee of the
associations for many years, and I worked with him
for 17 years. And long about that time or before, We
had three trustees. One was Sterling Evans, one
was Jimmy Aston from Dallas, and one was a fella,
Estelle, that was president of the big bank in Fort
Worth. And we'd meet usually in Fort Worth and
Dallas for dinner. And during those discussions,
we would talk about student life. And that's when I
recall more than any other time Sterling
expressing his opinions to these other two men
that something was going to have to be done at A&M
and that was to let the girls come and to let them
make that call. And he was one of them. Before John
Lindsay, he was one of the other ones that back in
the early days had the vision to realize that we
needed to do something. Do you have any idea who it
was put their arm around Earl Rudder's shoulder
and kind of said, come on, Earl, let's go with it?
My guess would be it was Harold Dunn. My guess it
would be Harold Dunn, because Harold was the
chairman of the century staff. And he was very
involved with it. And he knew psychology. And he
knew that Earl was scared to death and was not
willing to really back him. And I don't know, but
I'm guessing it would have been well done. Now, I
may sound to be a little critical of Earl, but I want
to be truthful about the way it all came out. And
I'll say this without fear of blind addiction. I
don't think a single person in the world could have
pulled this off. Except? Except our old brother.
Now I say he drugged his feet, which I think he did. I
don't think he won, which I don't think he did. I
don't think he won the name check, but he probably
did. And I don't think that we could have had
another version at the time. that could have
rolled with the punches, stayed in there, worked
with the legislature, and got this thing done. Now
Earl had a lot of help, but he was a driving force in
bringing people like you
and a lot of people you know to this campus. Well,
let me put into this. a little connection. As the
Secretary of the Aspirations Report, it was my job
to write the draft of the report, particularly on
RISL, Resident Instruction Student Life. The
other part on research and extension was easy, do
more better. So it was my job then to write up the
part arguing for, justifying, non-compulsory
core racial integration, women, higher
admission requirements, and so forth. I turned it
in to Wayne Hall, the Vice President of Academic
Affairs. He called me back three or four days
later, gave me the copy that Mr. Rutter had read and
annotated. He told me to revise it, bring it in line
with Mr. Rutter's comments, a number of which were
negative. Who prepared that? The original, or I
did. You prepared it and sent it to Rutter and he
made some notes on it. And where'd you get this?
This is a bunch of crap. No way. I go back to Vice
President Hall a few days later and said, I can't in
good faith make those changes because the
committee. That's not the report. That's right.
That. Our opinions are subjective. We may be in
error, but we do believe that A&M has got to make
these changes. And I always am proud to say, to
recall that he said, I'll stake my job on your right
to speak what the committee really believes. And
so I turned it back, didn't hear any more. I then
forgot to turn back in the copy with Mr. Rutter's
comments. About two months later, one Sunday
morning, Got a call from Dorsey McCrory. We were on
our way to Sunday school in the garage. Where was
that copy? In my office in Nagel Hall. I'll get it to
you in a few days. He said, I'll meet you at Nagel
Hall in 10 minutes. And I'm guessing that somebody
had told him, get that report. Earl. Yeah, that's
my guess. Earl told him to get it. So I gave it back to
him. I don't know whether it still exists or not. I
never had any call from anybody to try to pressure
me or anything else. And I don't know that any
member of the committee did. But we all admitted
that we were surprised when we voted unanimously
for all these changes that each of us thought he
might be a minority of one or two. And we were
pleasantly surprised that it went on. Are you
aware of whether or not the board of directors,
then called board directors, did they have any
long debates over this or do you know? I do not know.
I do not know. I don't even have a copy of that
report.
I got it when I left the association. I just didn't
think about taking a copy of that report. I
remember when it was done and I just thought it was a
beautiful piece of work. Didn't Bob Hunt prepare
one first and it was thrown out the window? I think
so. I think that Bob Hunt prepared one, but not
acceptable. And I remember talking to Darcy and
talking to Wayne Hall to some extent. And they
said, well, we're going to redo it. And I think I
knew at that time that they'd moved it over to you to
prepare. But I don't remember. I think that
everybody was so relieved and so pleased with the
report and the decisions that came out that we all
just assumed that it was going to be approved by
everybody. Now, how much debate did the board
have? I doubt that they had very much. We never
heard of any rumors or hints that there was any
division when the board did I don't recall any
division on the part of the board. I think the board
was very informed and knew all about this century
study that was being conducted. And they knew what
was happening.
And I think that they were prepared for it all when
it came out. I remember the name change was one of
the biggest things that happened in the whole
thing. By that time we realized that we were going
to have integration. I'm sure we had some blacks
already by that time. I can line it up. Did you hear,
I never heard any opposition to integration, did
you? No, no. I never heard a rumble over that. I
didn't hear a thing. The only thing I heard was the
late women, the optional, and the name check. even
though Bill Moore, in a moment of
not much attendance, got a Senate resolution
passed making the Corps optional. And nobody
hardly knew about what was happening. And this
caused quite an uproar. This was before the
century started. Now, Moore was for the changes,
wasn't he? Yes, very much so. Moore was for
optional coal. Moore was for co-education. He was
for the name change. He was for integration. I
don't think he was on the century study, because he
was a state senator. But he was for the . Now,
Brownrigg Dewey was our representative. And as
far as I know, he was quietly low key for. Low key
for. Brownrigg never talked much about it. But
Bill Moore was. Boy, he was strong. And you know
Bill and Earl were like this. And they tried not to
fire me. But Bill Moore had talked to Earl, and I
didn't know it, about making the former student's
office move off the campus. And I didn't know it.
Because? Because they claimed that I talked very
impugned. into running against Biltmore. I
didn't know all this was going on. We had an
executive board meeting, and we had the meeting,
right at the end of the meeting, President,
somebody said, by the way, we've got this problem
we need to talk about. And I said, what's the
problem? And they said, Biltmore is old enough to
be unhappy with you. And Pew was running against
change, wasn't he? Wasn't he opposed to the
changes? Well, probably. Marion Pugh? Probably.
Okay. But this situation had nothing to do with the
Century Senate. Oh, okay. He was running for the
Senate. Bill Moore had announced he was running
for the State Senate against Bill Moore. Somebody
had told Bill Moore that me personally had talked
Marion Pugh into it. Therefore, he was mad at me and
he was mad at the association. We had this meeting.
I said, I did not have one thing in the world to do
with it. The first time I knew that Pew was running
against Bill Moore was when I saw Pew's picture of
the eagle. And I just told him honestly. I said, I'm
telling you, I didn't know a thing about it. Wayne
Durham from Abilene was on our board. He was a good
friend of Bill Moore last night. And I forgot who
was president of the association there, but they
said, well you go to Austin and talk to Bill Moore.
Tell Bill Moore that the association and Herbie
had nothing to do with Pew electing to run against
you, which I didn't. And he went and talked to Bill
Moore. Bill Moore just forgot about it. And later
on, Bill Moore and I got to be close friends, still
are. And I think I'm partly responsible for
getting Earl and Bill Moore together, and they
did. Now, I heard third-hand reports that by sheer
coincidence, during some of those months of
debate, two automobiles would drive with their
lights off into the parking lot behind the campus
theater at about 10 o'clock at night and these two
total strangers would roll down their driver's
side window and would chat with this total
stranger in the other vehicle and that a close
observer if he had walked by might have realized
that this was the state senator and the A&M
president who just accidentally happened to be
there chatting with each other but they They then
could also say, whomever those strangers were,
that they had never really talked about this with
the other one. Deep throat? Yeah. During your time
with the association, did the association ever
engage in any activity in Austin for anything?
Well, yes.
Did you all lobby for better appropriations? We
lobbied mainly, we lobbied for better
appropriations as far as we could under our
charter. We wouldn't do anything to question our
tax status. And you can't try to enforce
legislation and maintain the type of tax status we
had. So we were very careful about that. But we did
lobby. Whenever our permanent university fund
was questioned, and we had more or less committees
among our 180 A&M clubs, those that were located in
Texas, to be prepared upon the receipt of the
telephone to go back. And I mean first team back. We
had some of the top stud horses in every town.
Houston, Dallas, Fort Worth, San Antonio, Parks
Christian, Abilene, El Paso, Texarkana, Tyler.
We had the state, every senatorial district, 31 in
Texas. And we had committees, standing
committees lined up. Ready to go. Ready to go. And
every once in a while we had to use them. And we put
them into effect. And here go the phone calls and
the letters to the people from those districts.
And we did mostly
work on the university fund to protect it. There
were always people trying to invade the
university fund. Another thing too, we were
active in getting legislation passed that
provided for funding for these other schools
outside the
University of Texas system. Now let's see, the
governors that you worked with would have been...
Well, John Connolly. Connolly. Then before him,
Shivers. Shivers and Smith. And Buford Jester? To
some extent, early. That was before Alan Shivers.
That was in right after the war, 46, 47, 48. Buford
Jester and then Shivers. And then who after
Shivers? Was it Conley or was it Smith? I believe
it's Conley. Conley, yeah. And during Conley's
administration is when Maggie Lee had such an
influence in traveling all over the state about,
well, when Earl came here, Earl sat down in the car,
I remember you talked about deep throat. Earl and I
would travel around in the car a lot, and he showed
me one day, he said, you know what the average
salary of a professor at A&M is? This would have
been in 57 or 58 or 59. 58, probably. 48. No, 58. He
came here in 57. $9,400. The average salary
of a professor. And I said, that's got to be
increased. We came that way. And that's when we got
Maggie to provide his airplane.
We got Tom Harrington early. I had a pair of guns
held. We got Logan Wilson from the University of
Texas.
We put in some money to provide to, we hired this
guy,
he was a bearded man from Austin, a lot as you may
know. You may remember him. And he was more or less a
staff director. He'd been a lobbyist and he helped
us. to improve, well first, we did a selling job to
the people of Texas, the big people of Texas, on the
importance of our education in Texas. The fact
that we were losing the top of our herd, our best
faculty people, to out of state institutions.
They were going, leaving here by the droves, not
going to stay in Texas, going up there where they
appreciated us. I think you were on some of these
trips, weren't
you? We'd get the top people in Houston, like
Beaumont, or Houston, or Dallas, or Fort Worth,
Abilene. We'd get the top people up there, mostly
Haitians, Dallas, to pay for the dinner. That was
the first thing we did. We got a sponsor. Once we got
the sponsor, then we invited the top people, like
Dallas. We had the mayors of all these, and we had
state senators, and we had members of the
legislature from those areas come, and Tom
Harrington and Logan Wilson were the main
speakers. Every once in a while Earl would do some
talking, and Ransom, Ransom was his name? Harry
Ransom. Harry Ransom from Austin would do the
talking. But we tried to keep Logan Wilson and Tom,
because Tom could make a good speech. Oh yeah. And
that's about the same time that Connery came up
with this sales tax. And I don't know whether he
dedicated the sales tax to education,
He used education as a reason for selling the
people of the state of Texas on the sales tax and so
that whole effort was very important and I think
more than anything else, even though we did
include the other state schools, it really
focused to the people of Texas the importance of
the University of Texas system and the A&M system
to the state. And we didn't exclude North Texas
State, we didn't exclude the East Texas,
Southwest, and all the rest of them. We included
them, but we were the forces.
Let's go back to the Deans. We had an interruption
and we were getting ready to talk about Frank
Hubert. Frank Hubert. Frank was my number one
contact, I think, except for maybe Earl and Darcy
and Wayne. I didn't deal too much with
Wayne. But Frank had been brought in here by Earl.
Do you know what the connection was there? Did they
know each other in Austin? Because Hubert was J.W.
Edgar's right-hand man at the Department of
Education for a while in Austin. In Austin. And I
was wondering if they knew each other then. I'm
going back and trying to recollect.
Earl needed help, and he needed some. for good
health when he first came back here. And I remember
some of those first people that he drew were Frank
Hubert. And I'm assuming, see Frank had been
superintendent of schools at Orange. That's
right. Was my high school principal. All right,
your high school principal. And he went with Mr.
J.W. Edgar in Austin. and that was a key role in
state at the time and I'm thinking that when Earl
was at Austin, when he was in politics more or less
with a land commuter job and getting elected job
and supporting Lyndon Johnson that he and Frank
were involved and He brought John Calhoun into
here from wherever John was, wherever John was.
Penn State. Penn State. He brought John into Penn
State. And he brought,
let me think a minute, this man that later went to
Oklahoma State, Bob Com. Com. He brought Bob Com in
the same time he brought John Calhoun in. Who else
along that time? He brought... Frank Hubert. Now
where did you find Dorsey McCrory? I got the
Dorsey. I was Dorsey's room hardy. Oh. And
Darcy under the Thomason Act went into the
service. Earl talked to me he said I wanted an
assistant and I want a retired, I want a reserve
officer and I want somebody that's got an A&M
degree.
And I wanted to be my sister. You gotta be somebody
to be recognized by the enemy. But my first
recommendation was Dave Hitch. You remember Dave
Hitch? I went to Earl and I said, Dave Hitch,
he's your man. And Earl called Dave Hitch. Dave
Hitch didn't want, he didn't want to leave Davis
Field. So Earl called me and said, we struck out on
For your first suggestion, I said, all right, I got
another one. I had talked to Darcy at a class
reunion or two. He wanted to get out of the
military. He was a full colonel in the Army. And I
had known that he had gone to Yale and gotten a
master's degree in Yale, but he was a reserve
officer. And he wanted a position with the
university. I guess it later proved off that I more
or less made a mistake. Anyway, I went to Earl and I
said, your man is a little colonel named McCrory.
And he said, well, can you get him down and talk to
me? And I said, yeah. I called him and gave him
Earl's telephone number. And I said, if he wants to
talk to me, you got to make arrangements to get him
in. He talked to Earl and the Army didn't want to let
him go because he just finished
this Naval War College or Army War College.
Anyway, Earl said, if you want to come and if you
will come, if you will accept the money, I'll pay
you. I'll get you separated from the Army. And I got
him a house he moved into when we first came. I did
all that stuff. Yeah, I got Darcy here. And Ed
Cooper, did he go to work for Mr. Rudder while you
were still? Yeah, I was involved in that too. Earl
was working in the, not Earl, but Ed Cooper was
working in the extension service. I think so. He
finished A&M in 53 and
I had people call me wanting to employ somebody to
run that
maritime thing in Galveston. And I called them and
I said, Ed Cooper's your man. I said, Ed Cooper?
Well, Ed went down and interviewed these people
and for some reason they couldn't quite get
together, but they were gonna pay him. salary two
or three times what he was making a year. Anyway, I
had gotten acquainted with Ed and become fond of
Ed. And
then when
Ed, by reason of Ed left the university, went to
work with Broach in the oil business for a while.
He had been,
I'm not sure he'd been in Earl's office before then
or not. I guess I'm kind of doubting. Anyway, Buck
was running the association
and Ed Cooper had left the college trying to make a
fortune in the oil and gas business and that didn't
work out. And
they found a position for him over there, and then I
guess when Dorsey, sometime in there, during
Earl's time, not during Jack Williams' time,
during Earl's administration,
I guess maybe Dorsey brought him in there, and
Dorsey went over to the development office.
Dorsey went to the development office in 61,
about.
This young man, John Lindsay. John Lindsay. When
did he become active in the former student? He was
active in the former students when I came back here
in 1947. So he already... He was already active in
the former students program. Very active. He was
on the councils and he was on the committees and he
was involved in Houston. Anytime you needed
anything in Houston, you'd count on John Lindsay
to step forward with it. He was, we would have the
A&M meetings around and he would be present, not in
the big open meetings, but in the smaller full
session type meetings when he was most effective.
That's when he would shake his fingers and just let
the girls come to the A&M. Can't keep them out
anymore. We had past presidents meetings around
every year. mostly a social event, but all the
old-class presidents would come back and we'd
have a meeting somewhere at a resort or somewhere,
and I recall at those meetings, John would, and
Earl would be president, a lot of them, and John
would say, fellas, we can't operate like we
operated in 1972. This is 1955, or this is 19, we've
got an 18 girls' committee. And John was talking
it, but nobody else would even mention girls. But
John was saying, we've got to move this forward. I
remember a meeting we had down at Key Allegro in
Rockport. Mr. Krueger's son, Carl Krueger,
developed that whole thing. And he had us down
there one time, he said he asked me, John, made a
speech to the people and we started picking up on
them. Harold Dunn started realizing, Jimmy Astin
started realizing, Bobby Krueger, Mr. Tyree
Bell, and some of those real leaders started
saying, well, we've got to do something. We've got
to do something. That was in the days when most of
the old
die-in-the-wool Aggies like Charlie Babcock. I
wouldn't think of a girl ever coming to him. I know
Mr. Babcock's opposition. Who were the other most
vocal, active opponents? Well, T.L. Smith, Jr.
used to be Mr. Charlie Babcock for the most vocal.